Update upstream distro to latest main and adapt integration (#383)
elastic/elastic-otel-php: docs/reference/edot-php/attribute-instrumentation.md

---
navigation_title: Attribute-based instrumentation
description: Create spans automatically using PHP 8 attributes with the Elastic Distribution of OpenTelemetry PHP (EDOT PHP).
applies_to:
  stack:
  serverless:
    observability:
  product:
    edot_php: ga 1.7.0
products:
  - id: cloud-serverless
  - id: observability
  - id: edot-sdk
---

# Attribute-based instrumentation

> EDOT PHP supports automatic span creation using PHP 8 attributes. Annotate methods or functions with `#[WithSpan]` to create spans without writing instrumentation code manually.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
EDOT PHP supports automatic span creation using PHP 8.1 attributes. Annotate methods or functions with `#[WithSpan]` to create spans without writing instrumentation code manually.
```
I presume we need 8.1 here as well.

## Prerequisites

> - PHP 8.1 or later (PHP attributes require PHP 8+).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- PHP 8.1 or later (PHP attributes require PHP 8.1+).
```

If we don't add .1 the line contradicts itself 🙂

- `open-telemetry/api` package installed in your application.

> - `OTEL_PHP_ATTR_HOOKS_ENABLED=true` set in the environment (disabled by default).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `OTEL_PHP_ATTR_HOOKS_ENABLED=true` set in the environment (deactivated by default).
```

> ## Enable

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Activate
```

or, better yet:

```suggestion
Activate attribute-based instrumentation
```

Reviewer: Could you please change the other instances where you use "enable/disable"? I know it seems like the most straightforward word choice considering what's in the code, but these are the rules we enforce in our docs.

Attribute-based instrumentation is disabled by default. Enable it using either an environment variable or the `php.ini` file:

::::{tab-set}

:::{tab-item} Environment variable (preferred)
```bash
export OTEL_PHP_ATTR_HOOKS_ENABLED=true
```
:::

:::{tab-item} Environment variable (deprecated)
```bash
export ELASTIC_OTEL_ATTR_HOOKS_ENABLED=true
```
:::

:::{tab-item} php.ini (preferred)
```ini
opentelemetry_distro.attr_hooks_enabled=true
```
:::

:::{tab-item} php.ini (deprecated)
```ini
elastic_otel.attr_hooks_enabled=true
```
:::

::::

## Basic usage

```php
use OpenTelemetry\API\Instrumentation\WithSpan;

class OrderService
{
    #[WithSpan]
    public function processOrder(int $orderId): string
    {
        // A span named "OrderService::processOrder" is created automatically.
        return "processed-{$orderId}";
    }
}
```

## `#[WithSpan]` options

```php
#[WithSpan(
    span_name: 'custom.span.name',          // default: "ClassName::methodName"
    span_kind: SpanKind::KIND_SERVER,        // default: KIND_INTERNAL
    attributes: ['key' => 'value'],          // static attributes added to the span
)]
```

> All arguments are optional and can be passed positionally or by name:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All arguments are optional. You can pass them positionally or by name.
```
Suggestion to avoid passive voice.

```

## Capturing parameter values with `#[SpanAttribute]`

Add `#[SpanAttribute]` to function parameters to include their runtime values as span attributes:

```php
use OpenTelemetry\API\Instrumentation\WithSpan;
use OpenTelemetry\API\Instrumentation\SpanAttribute;

class UserService
{
    #[WithSpan]
    public function createUser(
        #[SpanAttribute] string $username,               // attribute key = "username"
        string                  $password,               // not captured
        #[SpanAttribute('user.email')] string $email,   // attribute key = "user.email"
    ): int {
        // ...
    }
}
```

## Capturing property values with `#[SpanAttribute]`

Apply `#[SpanAttribute]` to class properties to capture their value at the time the method is called:

```php
class InvoiceService
{
    #[SpanAttribute]
    public string $customerId = '';

    #[SpanAttribute('invoice.currency')]
    public string $currency = 'EUR';

    #[WithSpan('invoice.generate')]
    public function generate(): string
    {
        // Span attributes include: customerId, invoice.currency
    }
}
```

## Exception recording

> If the annotated method throws, the span automatically records the exception and sets status to `ERROR`. The exception propagates normally.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the annotated method throws an exception, the span automatically records it and sets status to `ERROR`. The exception propagates normally.
```
I know what you mean here, but I don't like the sentence structure with just bare "throws" (begs the question "throws what?"). However, the implication is clear either way, so feel free to disregard my comment.

{
    throw new \RuntimeException('something went wrong');
    // Span is ended with STATUS_ERROR and exception event attached.
}
```

## Nested spans

Calling one `#[WithSpan]` method from another creates nested spans automatically:

```php
class Pipeline
{
    #[WithSpan('pipeline.run')]
    public function run(): void
    {
        $this->step1(); // child span: "pipeline.step1"
        $this->step2(); // child span: "pipeline.step2"
    }

    #[WithSpan('pipeline.step1')]
    private function step1(): void {}

    #[WithSpan('pipeline.step2')]
    private function step2(): void {}
}
```

## Standalone functions

`#[WithSpan]` works on standalone functions, not only methods:

```php
#[WithSpan('compute.result')]
function computeResult(#[SpanAttribute] int $input): int
{
    return $input * 2;
}
```

## Standard span attributes

Every `#[WithSpan]` span includes these attributes from the declaration site:

| Attribute | Value |
| --- | --- |
| `code.function` | Function or method name |
| `code.namespace` | Class name (empty for standalone functions) |
| `code.filepath` | Source file path |
| `code.lineno` | Line number of the declaration |

## Compatibility

> `#[WithSpan]` and `#[SpanAttribute]` are the same attributes used by the official [opentelemetry-php-instrumentation](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-php-instrumentation) extension. Applications already using that extension can enable this feature without code changes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`#[WithSpan]` and `#[SpanAttribute]` are the same PHP attributes used by the official [opentelemetry-php-instrumentation](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-php-instrumentation) extension. Applications already using that extension can activate this feature without code changes.
```

Suggestion to avoid ambiguity, as "attributes" could mean both PHP language attributes and span attributes.
